.. _dev_external_libraries:

Packaging an External Library
=============================

The :ref:`Defining a Library <dev_libraries>` guide shows how to subclass
:class:`.Design`, :class:`.StdCellLibrary`, and :class:`.PDK` to describe a
piece of IP. That is enough when the library class lives alongside the design
that uses it. Once you want to *share* a library, across projects, across a
team, or as a versioned deliverable, you package it as a standalone,
``pip``-installable Python distribution.

This guide covers that packaging layer: the project layout, the
``pyproject.toml``, and how bundled data files are located no matter where the
package is installed. A single package can bundle
libraries, PDKs, flows, and even custom tool drivers, and expose them through a
target. For the details of the individual module classes, this guide links back
to :ref:`libraries <dev_libraries>`, :ref:`pdks <dev_pdks>`,
:ref:`flows <dev_flows>`, :ref:`tools <dev_tools>`, and
:ref:`targets <dev_targets>`. Throughout, the package is given the generic name
``mylib`` so you can substitute your own.

Why package a library
---------------------

Distributing a library as its own package buys you:

* **Reuse** — any project can ``pip install mylib`` and ``import`` it, instead
  of copying files into each design.
* **Versioning** — the package carries a version, so a design can pin the exact
  library revision it was signed off against.
* **Data locality** — data files (LEF, GDS, ``.lib``, ...) travel with the
  package and resolve automatically, whether the package is installed from PyPI
  or in editable mode from a local checkout.

Package layout
--------------

A library package is an ordinary Python distribution with an importable module
at its root. A typical layout mirrors the categories of module you provide:

.. code-block:: text

   mylib/                    # repository root
   ├── pyproject.toml        # build + packaging configuration
   ├── MANIFEST.in           # controls which files land in the sdist
   ├── README.md
   ├── LICENSE
   └── mylib/                # the importable Python package
       ├── __init__.py       # package init (optionally a shared dataroot mixin)
       ├── _version.py       # auto-generated by setuptools_scm
       ├── libs/             # standard-cell / hard IP (StdCellLibrary subclasses)
       ├── pdks/             # PDK definitions (siliconcompiler.PDK subclasses)
       ├── flows/            # custom Flowgraph definitions
       ├── tools/            # custom tool/task drivers
       └── targets/          # targets bundling any of the above

Every module subpackage is **optional** — include only what you ship. A package
might provide just a library, just a PDK, just a flow or tool driver, or any
combination, and expose it through a target.

Small data files (a hand-edited LEF, a black-box Verilog stub) can be committed
directly under the relevant subpackage, e.g.
``mylib/libs/mymacro/mymacro.lef``. Large or proprietary data (full foundry
decks) is usually kept *outside* the package and referenced through an
environment variable, see :ref:`Two dataroot strategies <ext_lib_dataroots>`.

The ``pyproject.toml``
----------------------

The build configuration does two jobs: build the package and derive its
version.

.. parsed-literal::

   [build-system]
   requires = ["setuptools >= 80", "setuptools_scm[toml] >= 8"]
   build-backend = "setuptools.build_meta"

   # Derive the version from git tags and write it into the package.
   [tool.setuptools_scm]
   version_file = "mylib/_version.py"

   [project]
   name = "mylib"
   description = "Example external library for SiliconCompiler."
   readme = "README.md"
   requires-python = ">= 3.10"
   # For proprietary IP, use a license reference instead of an SPDX id, e.g.
   # license = "LicenseRef-MyCompany-Proprietary"
   license = "Apache-2.0"
   license-files = ["LICENSE"]
   dynamic = ["version"]
   dependencies = [
       "siliconcompiler == |release|",
       # Depend on other libraries you build on, e.g.:
       # "lambdapdk",
   ]

   [tool.setuptools]
   include-package-data = true

Points worth calling out:

* **Versioning** — ``setuptools_scm`` derives the package version from git tags
  and writes it into ``mylib/_version.py`` on every build, so each release is
  stamped with a version that designs can pin against. Because that file is
  generated, add it to ``.gitignore`` rather than committing it:

  .. code-block:: text

     # .gitignore
     mylib/_version.py
* **``include-package-data = true``** — together with ``MANIFEST.in``, this
  ensures committed data files ship inside the wheel. Prune what you do not
  need (tests, examples) and explicitly include your package sources and data:

  .. code-block:: text

     # MANIFEST.in
     prune tests
     prune examples
     recursive-include mylib *.py
     recursive-include mylib *.lef *.gds *.v

* **Pinning SiliconCompiler** — pin ``siliconcompiler`` in ``dependencies`` to
  the exact release you develop against using an ``==`` constraint; the current
  release is |release|.

.. note::

   More advanced packages can also register SiliconCompiler *entry points* to
   plug into documentation source links, ``show``/``open`` tasks, and
   tool-install helpers (the ``siliconcompiler.docs``, ``siliconcompiler.showtask``,
   and ``siliconcompiler.install`` groups), plus ``[project.scripts]`` for CLI
   apps.

.. _ext_lib_path_mixin:

Locating data files
-------------------

For SiliconCompiler to find a module's data files no matter where the package is
installed, each module registers a **dataroot**. The simplest approach anchors
the dataroot to the module's own source file: passing ``__file__`` to
``set_dataroot`` roots the data at the directory containing that module, so
files are added relative to it.

.. code-block:: python

   self.set_dataroot(f"mylib-{self.name}", __file__)

Giving the dataroot a name unique to the module (here ``mylib-<name>``) keeps it
from clashing when several libraries are combined into one project.

.. note::

   If you would rather share a single dataroot across the whole package — for
   example to reference files that live in sibling subpackages — define a small
   mixin that every module inherits and point it at the installed package:

   .. code-block:: python

      # mylib/__init__.py
      from siliconcompiler.schema_support.pathschema import PathSchema


      class _MyLibPath(PathSchema):
          def __init__(self):
              super().__init__()
              self.set_dataroot("mylib", "python://mylib")

   The ``python://mylib`` dataroot resolves to the installed location of the
   ``mylib`` package. To additionally fetch large data files that are *not*
   shipped in the wheel, give the dataroot a git fallback keyed to the package
   version with ``PythonPathResolver.set_dataroot``.

.. _ext_lib_dataroots:

Two dataroot strategies
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Real libraries commonly mix two kinds of dataroot:

#. **Packaged data** — the per-module dataroot rooted at ``__file__`` above, for
   files committed to and shipped with the package. Use this for small files
   (edited LEFs, black-box stubs, RTL stubs).
#. **External data** — foundry decks are often too large or too restricted to
   commit. Point a second dataroot at an environment variable so users supply
   the data out-of-band:

   .. code-block:: python

      self.set_dataroot("foundry", "$FOUNDRY_ROOT/tech/mylib/v1p0")

   Files added under this dataroot resolve against ``$FOUNDRY_ROOT`` at run time.
   Whenever a module relies on an environment variable like this, set a default
   for it in the :ref:`target <ext_lib_target>` so users are not left to
   configure it by hand.

Defining modules inside the package
-----------------------------------

Libraries, PDKs, flows, and tool drivers are defined exactly as in the
:ref:`libraries <dev_libraries>`, :ref:`pdks <dev_pdks>`,
:ref:`flows <dev_flows>`, and :ref:`tools <dev_tools>` guides. The only packaging
addition is that any module shipping data files sets a dataroot from ``__file__``
(and typically mixes in ``CachedSchema``) so those files travel with the package.
A hard-IP library looks like:

.. code-block:: python

   # mylib/libs/mymacro/__init__.py
   from siliconcompiler import StdCellLibrary
   from siliconcompiler.schema import CachedSchema
   from siliconcompiler.tools.openroad import OpenROADStdCellLibrary
   from siliconcompiler.tools.klayout import KLayoutLibrary

   from mylib.pdks import mypdk


   class MyMacro(OpenROADStdCellLibrary, KLayoutLibrary,
                 StdCellLibrary, CachedSchema):
       def __init__(self):
           super().__init__()
           self.set_name("mymacro")
           self.package.set_vendor("MyVendor")
           self.package.set_version("v1p0")

           # Root data files at this module's own directory.
           self.set_dataroot(f"mylib-{self.name}", __file__)

           # Associate the PDK this IP targets.
           self.add_asic_pdk(mypdk.MyPDK())

           # Files committed next to this module, added relative to its directory.
           with self.active_dataroot(f"mylib-{self.name}"):
               with self.active_fileset("models.physical"):
                   self.add_file("mymacro.lef")
                   self.add_file("mymacro.gds")
                   self.add_asic_aprfileset()

           # Timing models come from an external dataroot. Keep each format in
           # its own fileset, tagged by corner and delay model with
           # add_asic_libcornerfileset(corner, model). Liberty (.lib) uses a
           # model like "nldm"; a compiled binary timing model (here ".bin")
           # uses the "<model>-bin" variant.
           self.set_dataroot("foundry", "$FOUNDRY_ROOT/tech/mylib/v1p0")
           with self.active_dataroot("foundry"):
               for corner in ("slow", "typical", "fast"):
                   with self.active_fileset(f"models.timing.{corner}.nldm"):
                       self.add_file(f"lib/mymacro_{corner}.lib.gz")
                       self.add_asic_libcornerfileset(corner, "nldm")

                   # Compiled binary timing model for the same corner.
                   with self.active_fileset(f"models.timing.{corner}.nldm-bin"):
                       self.add_file(f"bin/mymacro_{corner}.bin", filetype="bin")
                       self.add_asic_libcornerfileset(corner, "nldm-bin")

The tool mixins (:class:`~siliconcompiler.tools.openroad.OpenROADStdCellLibrary`,
:class:`~siliconcompiler.tools.klayout.KLayoutLibrary`, ...) attach tool-specific
parameters so the library carries everything a flow needs; see
:ref:`Tool Extension Classes <tool_extension_classes>` for the full list. PDKs
follow the same recipe with :class:`.PDK` and the tool ``*PDK`` mixins; see
:ref:`pdks <dev_pdks>`.

A **tool driver** is a :class:`.Task` subclass. It names its tool and task,
declares the executable, and ships any reference scripts alongside the module:

.. code-block:: python

   # mylib/tools/mytool/__init__.py
   from siliconcompiler import Task


   class MyToolTask(Task):
       def tool(self):
           return "mytool"

       def task(self):
           return "convert"

       def parse_version(self, stdout):
           return stdout.strip()

       def setup(self):
           super().setup()
           self.set_exe("mytool", vswitch="--version", format="tcl")
           self.add_version(">=1.0.0")

           # Reference scripts committed next to this module.
           self.set_dataroot("mytool-scripts", __file__)
           with self.active_dataroot("mytool-scripts"):
               self.set_refdir("scripts")
           self.set_script("convert.tcl")

       def runtime_options(self):
           options = super().runtime_options()
           # Each token is its own list item — never "-flag value" as one string.
           options.append("-batch")
           options.extend(["-log", "convert.log"])
           return options

A task with no external executable overrides ``run()`` (returning an exit code)
instead of declaring an ``exe``; everything else about the class is the same.
See :ref:`tools <dev_tools>` for the full task API.

A **flow** is a :class:`.Flowgraph` subclass that wires tasks into a graph of
steps with ``node()`` and ``edge()`` — and it can reference both built-in tasks
and the package's own:

.. code-block:: python

   # mylib/flows/myflow.py
   from siliconcompiler import Flowgraph
   from siliconcompiler.tools.slang.elaborate import Elaborate

   from mylib.tools.mytool import MyToolTask


   class MyFlow(Flowgraph):
       def __init__(self, name: str = "myflow"):
           super().__init__(name)
           self.node("elaborate", Elaborate())
           self.node("convert", MyToolTask())
           self.edge("elaborate", "convert")

See :ref:`flows <dev_flows>` for composing larger graphs.

.. _ext_lib_delaymodel:

ASIC timing models and the delay model
--------------------------------------

Standard-cell timing ships in more than one format. Liberty (``.lib``) is read
by the open-source tools; some libraries also provide a compiled, binary timing
model (here ``.bin``) that a tool can load without parsing Liberty. A library
keeps each format in its own fileset, tagged with a **corner** and a **delay
model** using ``add_asic_libcornerfileset(corner, model)`` (see the library
example above). By convention the compiled variant of a delay model is named
``<model>-bin``:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1

   * - Delay model
     - Fileset
     - Files
   * - ``nldm``
     - ``models.timing.<corner>.nldm``
     - Liberty (``.lib``)
   * - ``nldm-bin``
     - ``models.timing.<corner>.nldm-bin``
     - compiled (``.bin``)
   * - ``ccs``
     - ``models.timing.<corner>.ccs``
     - CCS Liberty (``.lib``)
   * - ``ccs-bin``
     - ``models.timing.<corner>.ccs-bin``
     - compiled (``.bin``)

A :ref:`target <ext_lib_target>` chooses one with
``project.set_asic_delaymodel("nldm")`` (or ``"nldm-bin"`` for a flow that reads
the compiled files). ``delaymodel`` is a free-form string, so ``<model>-bin``
works purely by matching the fileset name you registered — there is no built-in
handling of the compiled format. Tool drivers resolve the files by looking up
``(corner, delaymodel)``, with no auto-select helper; for how a driver consumes
these filesets in Python and TCL, see
:ref:`Reading ASIC standard-cell timing <dev_tools_asic_timing>`.

.. _ext_lib_target:

Bundling into a target
----------------------

To give users a one-call setup, provide a :ref:`target <dev_targets>` function
that assembles the PDK, libraries, and flow — and sets a default for any
environment variable the modules depend on:

.. code-block:: python

   # mylib/targets/mytarget.py
   import os

   from siliconcompiler import ASIC

   from mylib.pdks import mypdk
   from mylib.libs import mymacro
   from mylib.flows.myflow import MyFlow


   def mytarget(project: ASIC):
       # Default the external dataroot only if the user has not already set it,
       # in the environment or on the project.
       if os.getenv("FOUNDRY_ROOT") is None and \
               project.option.get_env("FOUNDRY_ROOT") is None:
           project.option.set_env("FOUNDRY_ROOT", "/opt/foundry")

       project.set_pdk(mypdk.MyPDK())
       project.set_mainlib(mymacro.MyMacro())
       project.set_flow(MyFlow())

       # Pick the timing view the tools read (see the delay-model section above);
       # use "nldm-bin" instead for a flow that reads the compiled timing model.
       project.set_asic_delaymodel("nldm")

If a module points a dataroot at an environment variable such as
``$FOUNDRY_ROOT``, setting it here with ``project.option.set_env`` means users
get a working default without configuring anything themselves.

Publishing to PyPI
------------------

For an open-source library, publishing to `PyPI <https://pypi.org>`_ lets anyone
install it with a plain ``pip install mylib``. Build the wheel and upload it:

.. code-block:: bash

   python3 -m build                 # build the wheel and sdist into dist/
   python3 -m twine upload dist/*   # publish to PyPI

Most projects prefer to automate this with a CI workflow — for example a GitHub
Action using `pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish
<https://github.com/pypa/gh-action-pypi-publish>`_ — that builds and publishes on
every tagged release. Proprietary libraries skip PyPI and are shared instead
through a private package index or straight from the git remote (see the VCS
install form below).

Installing and using the library
--------------------------------

Once published, the library is installed like any Python package:

.. code-block:: bash

   pip install mylib
   # for local development against your working tree:
   pip install -e .
   # or install a specific tagged revision straight from a git remote:
   pip install "mylib @ git+https://company.com/git/mylib.git@v1.0.5"

The last form uses pip's `VCS direct-reference syntax
<https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/topics/vcs-support/>`_, which is handy for
private libraries hosted on an internal git server.

The package is consumed either through its target or by adding its modules
directly:

.. code-block:: python

   import siliconcompiler
   from mylib.libs import mymacro
   from mylib.targets.mytarget import mytarget

   project = siliconcompiler.ASIC()

   # Option A: one-call setup via the target.
   mytarget(project)

   # Option B: attach modules directly.
   project.add_asiclib(mymacro.MyMacro())

   # project.run()

Because each library roots its dataroot at its own ``__file__``, all of its data
files resolve automatically, whether it was installed from PyPI or checked out
in editable mode.

Reference
---------

* :ref:`Defining a Library <dev_libraries>` — the library classes and filesets.
* :ref:`Defining a PDK <dev_pdks>` — packaging a process kit.
* :ref:`Building a Flowgraph <dev_flows>` — defining flows to ship in the package.
* :ref:`Integrating a New Tool <dev_tools>` — writing custom tool drivers.
* :ref:`Creating a Target <dev_targets>` — bundling modules into a target.
