# SC Documentation

This directory contains SC documentation, powered by
[Sphinx](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/).

## Generating docs

To generate documentation as a webpage, run `make html` from this directory. The
output will be generated in `_build/html/index.html`. You can either open up
this file directly in a web browser, or serve the docs using
`python -m http.server -d _build/html`. This will display the documentation at http://localhost:8000.

If you have a Latex distribution installed, you can also generate PDF
documentation through `make latexpdf`. For a full list of targets Sphinx
supports, run `make` from this directory.

## Docs structure

The documentation entry point is `index.rst`. For now, this file just links to
an `api.rst` page that includes the API documentation autogenerated from Python
files. This follows the structure of other Python projects that use Sphinx for
documentation, such as [Flask](https://flask.palletsprojects.com/en/1.1.x/).

`conf.py` contains basic Sphinx configuration, including the project name,
documentation theme, and extensions. `Makefile` and `make.bat` provide build
shortcuts, and are autogenerated by Sphinx itself.

This directory also contains an SC CLI reference and schema reference. These can
be integrated into our Sphinx docs in the future.

## Writing docs

Sphinx supports [reStructuredText](https://docutils.sourceforge.io/rst.html)
markup by default. Docs can be written in prose using this markup language, and
Python API docs can also be autogenerated from docstrings.

In order to add autogenerated Python API docs for a given module, insert the
following placeholder into an rst file:

```
.. automodule:: siliconcompiler.<mod_name>
    :members:
```

(see `api.rst` for examples).

We've configured Sphinx using the
[Napoleon](https://sphinxcontrib-napoleon.readthedocs.io/ ) extension to support
Google-style Python docstrings. For more info on how to write these, see the
relevant [Google style guide section][google-style] and the [Napoleon
documentation's examples][napoleon-examples].

[google-style]: https://chromium.googlesource.com/chromiumos/docs/+/master/styleguide/python.md#describing-arguments-in-docstrings
[napoleon-examples]: https://sphinxcontrib-napoleon.readthedocs.io/en/latest/example_google.html#example-google
